---
layout: default
title: Executive Summary
permalink: discussion-paper/01_executive_summary.html
bibliography: 'refs.bib'
---

Executive Summary 
=================

Computing and data, and the expertise and tools to make use of both, is
now central to all fields of study. Ten years after the creation of
Compute Canada in response to the National Platforms Fund call, and
after the Naylor Report on science funding, it is an apt time for the
Canadian community built around this national research platform to take
stock. Is it doing what we need it to do for Canadian researchers? Is it
working the way we want it to? What should a Canadian computation and
data platform for supporting research look like in the coming years?
This document aims to begin that discussion within the community.

Here we propose seven principles to guide us in this discussion — that
our project should serve Canadian research in a researcher-centred,
service-oriented, and truly national way; and that it should operate as
a true federation of equal partners, interoperable but not identical,
collaborative and up-to-date. We suggest in particular that it is vital
that our national platform is adaptive and responsive to researchers,
making choices driven by research needs and not technical choices, and
should make full use of the diversity and specialization that a Canadian
federation and its partners offer.

From those principles, we make evidence-based proposals for an renewed
Canadian organization. Comparisons with successful examples of federated
organizations within Canada and abroad suggest that while the basic
architecture of our federation is sound, important relationships need to
be clarified. While a central office must be responsible for the
processes of defining priorities, strategies, and standards of
interoperability, a successful federation requires those processes to
set by consensus, by partners committed to the goals of the
organization. The Board of the central office in a federation must have
experience and training to handle the delicate task of governing a
central office but being responsible to a national community. The
Members need better visibility into the operations of the central office
and the federation as a whole so that they can own their vital role in
the organization. And that engagement needs to extend to all who are
invested in the success of research in Canada: regional staff and
Boards, institutional staff, researchers and funders, and other
organizations that provide digital infrastructure for research in
Canada. Because of the author’s experience and immediate relevance, the
document focusses on Compute Canada in particular, but the principles
and proposals apply to any digital research infrastructure providers, or
the system as a whole.

Success for this document will mean starting conversations, inspiring
other documents and differing points of view, and the emerging of a
consensus within the community of what a renewed national platform for
the next ten years looks like. That does not mean this document is a
straw-man. The authors have played roles in the national platform
starting at its inception, from researcher to consortium and regional
(east and west) staff and management, and within the Compute Canada
central office, and hope that experience plus the benefit of some
distance have produced a coherent and compelling vision of what the
Compute Canada national project could be. But what matters is not this
proposal; it is what the community as a whole decides it wants its
national platform to be.
