---
layout: default
title: Introduction
permalink: discussion-paper/02_introduction.html
bibliography: 'refs.bib'
---

Introduction 
============

Fundamental to supporting research in Canada are a handful of questions:
How do we know what services researchers need? How do we best provide
them? What is the role of a central office? What are the roles of
provincial organizations and institutions? How should decisions get
made?

This document contains one proposed set of answers to these questions
for the Compute Canada national platform; a sketch of one possible
alternate future for providing computational research support in Canada.
Its intention is to begin a discussion within the community, where we
look forward together and ask how computing- and data-powered research
should be supported.

The Compute Canada national project for supporting research through
computing and data was assembled over the past ten years to drastically
improve the capabilities of Canadian research. Investigators were too
often limited in the scholarship they could perform because of lack of
local research computing expertise, or availability of storage or
computational resources. The solution to this problem was clear then, as
it is now. The scarcest and most valuable of our resources, the
expertise of research computing staff, grows rather than being
diminished by applying it to many diverse problems; economies of scale
apply to the sharing of large computational and storage resources. Thus,
the best way to support Canadian research is to provide and share
resources, rather than building small silos.

No one can deny that the research that has been enabled by the hardware
and expertise provided over the years is, and continues to be,
exceptional. However, like any organization it must strive to be better
and challenges must be addressed with input from the entire community.
Over time, the project named Compute Canada has gone from being a loose
association of occasionally-cooperating independent sites to an
organization with a sizeable central office where a great deal of
decision making is consolidated. In this document, we argue that neither
approach is sustainable; neither provides the best results for Canadian
research; neither is ambitious enough in what we can do for our
researchers and scholars. We instead present a vision for Compute Canada
for the next ten years that is national, but not centralized; that is
diverse, but interoperable; and that is focussed on supporting Canadian
research with a wide range of services reflecting the breadth and depth
of Canadian scholarship.

Computation and data plays a central role in all fields of study; the
national project should aim for nothing less than to give Canadian
researchers an unfair advantage in tackling problems that are important
to Canada. Suggestions have been made by Canada’s Fundamental Science
Review (the Naylor report), and will be made by an upcoming Leadership
Council for Digital Research Infrastructure report; but now is the time
for we the community including researchers, staff, the members and all
who support Canadian research to take a step back and have a real
discussion about where to go to next. It is time for us to decide what
we want computational support for Canadian research to look like, and
how it should work.

Any Compute Canada, present or future, must be judged against a set of
principles to guide the research support organization. We propose seven
such principles: that a Canadian computation and data research support
platform should serve Canadian research in a researcher-centred,
service-oriented, and national way; and it should operate as a true
federation, interoperable but not identical, collaborative, and
up-to-date. From those principles, and based on the experiences of other
federated organizations in Canada and abroad, we suggest concrete
organizational improvements that could help us move towards our goals.

For motivation and concreteness, we begin with an attempt to illustrate
what such a future federation would look like, from the most important
point of view — that of the researcher.
