---
layout: default
title: Governance Best Practices from Other Federations
permalink: discussion-paper/05_governance_best_practices.html
bibliography: 'refs.bib'
nocite: '\nocite{*}'
---

Governance Best Practices from Other Federations 
================================================

Managing and running a complex partnership like the one that is
responsible for our national platform, or any digital infrastructure
platform, may seem daunting. But it is vital to realize that federated
organizations are increasingly common in the nonprofit sector,
especially in Canada or amongst international NGOs, and that many
successful examples are available.

There is no one-size-fits-all approach to organizing a federation of
partners. However, significant thought and effort, in Canada and abroad,
has gone into examining governance and management models in a variety of
contexts; we can learn both from models that have worked very well, and
from cautionary tales. The authors have found the studies listed in the
References to be particularly valuable in informing this work.

Evidence of successful federations from across Canada and abroad suggest
that the choice of the basic architecture of our federation is sound.
But relationships and processes matter a great deal; (Widmer and Houchin
1999) report that they “...came to believe that federations were more
likely to be damaged by bad processes than bad structures”. Thus, we
focus on how several vital relationships can benefit from being
renegotiated in the light of what is done elsewhere. As a starting point
for discussion, we take the evidence of federations elsewhere and
propose steps for renewing the governance our federation.

(Mollenhauer 2009) pointed out that “The goal of any federation should
be to get the benefits of a centralized structure, such as greater
efficiency and effectiveness” — and in our case, coherence — “ while
retaining the benefits of local autonomy, such as community
responsiveness.” It is fair to say that previous attempts at organizing
our federation have focused more on one or the other of those sets of
advantages. But armed with working examples from elsewhere in Canada and
abroad, we can aim to achieve a balance of both.

Clarity of Roles 
----------------

Indeed, evidence suggests some helpful moves have already been made.
(Mollenhauer 2012) describes several successful Canadian organizations
going through a ground-up consolidation process very similar to our
history, with service providers organizing first into consortia, and
then into regional organizations. In the case of both the ALS Society of
Canada and the Parkinson Society of Canada, this move was made with the
intent to improve both the speed of national decision-making and the
coherence of local decision-making, while giving the federated
organization a healthy balance between national office and regional
offices.

**Proposal: The federation partners, members, and funders must come to
agreement on clearly-delineated roles and responsibilities of the
central office and regional organizations.**

However, in the case of our federation, this move may have been
incomplete. In both of those two cases part of the process involved
clear partnership agreements agreed to by the new regional organizations
and the central office as to the roles and responsibilities of each.
(Partners 2009) briefly describe a similar process with the American
Cancer Society and the Girl Scouts of America — in the case of the Girl
Scouts, the clarity of interactions offered by this detailed description
of roles allowed, for the first time, delivering programs jointly with
external partners

In a case study of the World Wildlife Fund US (Wei-Skillern and Herman
2008), staff described these sorts of agreements very positively: “We
learned that we need these kinds of network initiatives to be formal,
not with bureaucracy, but with people needing to know each other’s
roles.”

Other federations have divided up roles and responsibilities between
federation partners in many different ways with success; the exact
delineation matters less than clarity and wide agreement.

Boards 
------

**Proposal: The central office Board should be provided the training and
the support necessary to play their role in the federation.**

(Mollenhauer 2009) offers a picture of a frequent challenge in Canadian
federated organizations which speaks to the central dilemma facing their
Boards:

> “A clear distinction needs to be made between the role of the national
> Board of Directors as it relates to the \[central office\] and its
> role in the federation. Some national Board of Directors act as if
> they have a greater ability to set direction and impose behaviors then
> is the case. As a result, they undervalue the essential role of the
> \[central office\] within the federation as convener and facilitator.
> … Even the language used by federations can be illustrative of the
> confusion about the role of the \[central office\]. The \[central
> office\] is a partner in the federation, but written and verbal
> communication often describes the \[central office\] as the
> federation.”

This dilemma is particularly acute for a research support organization,
where the Board has responsibilities to both a national membership
needing national services, and a national funder requiring national
governance, but authority only over a central office — and satisfying
their responsibilities requires the participation of all partners in the
federation. A Board in this situation can only be successful when their
responsibilities are aligned — all federation partners are committed to
their shared mission, and national membership and funders that
understand the challenges but accept them for the sake of the benefits.

Even then, handling the conflicting roles of a central office board in a
federation is genuinely difficult, and we have asked board members to
date to take this on with little to no support on how best to proceed.
Most studies recommend board training that emphasizes the challenges and
possibilities of a federated system, and how governance activities and
other board decisions can support the work of the federation as a whole.
In our federation this would complement, but still require, greater
clarity of the role and the mandate of the central office.

**Proposal: The central office and regional Boards should regularly meet
to ensure alignment of governance.**

With the recognition that a central office Board does not operate in a
vacuum, some other possibilities for support present themselves. While
in our federation to date, there has been much effort in establishing
ongoing meetings between management and staff of the partners of our
federation, several works also suggest similar interactions between
members of the Boards of the partners to ensure alignment of not just
management, but governance, particularly while partners of our
federation are adjusting to newly-defined roles.

Membership 
----------

Evidence from the study of successful international advocacy NGOs
(Brown, Ebrahim, and Batliwala 2012), suggest that membership in a
federation should reflect the primary accountability of the federation.
In our case, this is to the researchers, strongly suggesting that
researchers or their representatives should be members; we suggest that
putting the burden on researchers to govern the federation that should
be working on their behalf is unreasonable, and that the existing model
of membership comprising institutions in their role as representing
researchers is a reasonable compromise.

**Proposal: Members should be given the access and support they need to
play an active role in the federation.**

Shared governance in a federation — or indeed the governance of any
member-owned non-profit — requires active participation of the members
to be successful. A finding of (Widmer and Houchin 1999) is that even in
federations where “the membership may appear to have significant powers,
in practice, the influence of the membership may be limited by
infrequent opportunities to exercise power \[...\], little control over
the agenda, lack of experience and cohesion among affiliate
representatives, and infrequent meetings of the membership”, whereas in
other organizations the membership is given many more opportunities to
participate in governance, from advisory roles to votes on policies.
Perhaps partly because of lack of visibility members have had into the
governance and management of the central office and the federation as a
whole, members to date have been reticent to fully participate. If our
project is to be successful, this needs to change; the federation has to
make sure its members have whatever support they need so that they can
take their full role within the federation.

In addition, the membership needs to be actively recruited to reflect as
broad a range of Canadian institutions as possible, and barriers to
membership should be reduced as much as feasible.

Federation-wide Decision Making 
-------------------------------

The role of a central office and how it complements the roles of the
other partners in the federation is crucial to a federation’s success.
(Brown, Ebrahim, and Batliwala 2012) identified several factors which
determine whether successful international organizations function as a
loosely-coupled network of allies or a more tightly-coupled federation.

In their work, they demonstrate that to the extent to which the work
being undertaken is long-term and coherence is needed, that federations,
being more tightly-coupled seem to work best. If the work is more short
term (as for individual short-term advocacy campaigns) or less coherence
is needed (as if each group was going to lobby only within its own
region), loosely-knit and perhaps even ad-hoc partnerships worked well.

We argue that Canadian research merits a long-term and coherent
computational platform for supporting research, meaning that a
federation, and not a loose network, is appropriate. But how should such
a federation operate internally? What should the roles of the individual
partners in the federation be, and how should decisions be made?

Management of a federation of co-equal partners can only be derived from
conensus. Again from (Mollenhauer 2009), a success factor in federations
is that:

> “There is a clear understanding that leadership is shared across the
> federation and there is acknowledgement of the role of consensus, not
> authority, as key to decision-making. The CEO/Executive Director of
> the national organization has strong skills in communication and
> facilitation and puts high value on process as well as on delivering
> results.”

**Proposal: Federation-wide decision making processes should be
supported by all members of the federation.**

This doesn’t mean that consensus must be achieved for every single
agenda item in a meeting — that brings paralysis — but on
decision-making processes themselves there must be explicit, formal
agreement, with clear distinctions between “between decisions that need
unanimous or consensus agreement because they are critical (e.g. those
tied to risk management) versus those that need a majority (e.g. those
related to activities).” And while a central office must be responsible
for those processes as the facilitator, which is a different role from
being the decision-maker.

The central office has played different roles over the years. As the
national arm of the platform, it will always be primarily responsible
for directly working with federal funders, national research
organizations and societies, and international partners. Working with
those organizations gives the central office a different, birds-eye view
of the national research community.

These different perspectives matter: our federation’s mandate is not
just to assist individual researchers already working with us but
Canadian researchers collectively. It is far too easy to focus too much
on either the forest or the trees, and the combination of hands-on and
birds-eye perspectives is vital in setting priorities, and consensus
decision making is required to bring these two perspectives together.

The Value of a Federation 
-------------------------

(Grossman and Rangan 2001) take an overview of five international
federations and look at what determines the relationship between the
partners. They point out that local autonomy and affiliation to a
central coherent framework aren’t opposed; one can have partner
organizations with high autonomy and low (Outward Bound) or high (The
Nature Conservancy) affiliation and coherence. The determining factor in
the authors’ view was the value of affiliation into a federation for the
partners; if there was high value in a federation, one would persist and
be stable, even in the presence of disagreements about operations or
strategy.

**Proposal: The federation should make it clear internally, to the
research community, and to funders, the value of the federation, the
delineation of roles, and the services provided by the federation.**

In the case of our federation, there are several important ways a
federation can be valuable to the partners, although these have not yet
been fully realized. A federation can enable specialization, allowing
individual providers to focus their efforts on the services they are
best at providing, instead of trying to be all things to all researchers
in their jurisdiction; and it can allow the researchers in the
jurisdiction to access a wider range of services and expertise than
would otherwise be possible. However, those value propositions are
greatly diminished if the national platform focuses on uniformity rather
than interoperability.

The WWF-US case study mentioned earlier illustrates the importance of
need for value from working together for a federation. In the early
2000s, after years of WWF national offices being largely independent
with only certain aspects being set centrally, there was disagreement
about mission and priorities. This grew to tension between the central
office (WWF International, in Switzerland), and several national
offices, including WWF-US, the largest, which had seriously considered
leaving the network.

But in the mid 2000s a major international victory surrounding
conservation preservation in Tesso Nilo, Indonesia, had required
coordinated pressure from several national organizations and expertise
ranging from finance and marketing and the ecosystem science to the
local governance and land management practices; this collaboration,
which had grown organically and almost accidentally, convinced the
member organizations to restructure the federation around such projects
of global impact requiring global effort. Decisions are now largely made
through a “network executive team” involving the central office and
representatives for national and program offices, and local office
commitments to various programmes are spelled out in detailed documents
agreed to by both sides. While the national offices retain autonomy, the
network now acts in a much more coherent, integrated way; that increased
coherence has brought *reduced* tension between central and local
offices due to the clarity of the mission.

On the other hand, if the value of federation isn’t made clear, partners
may stop engaging with the federation or even depart, such as with the
recent situation with the Alzheimer’s Association in the US (McCambridge
2016).


References
================================================

Brown, L. David, Alnoor Ebrahim, and Srilatha Batliwala. 2012.
“Governing International Advocacy NGOs.” *World Development* 40 (6):
1098–1108.
[link](http://doi.org/10.1016/j.worlddev.2011.11.006).

Grossman, Allen, and V Kasturi Rangan. 2001. “Managing Multisite
Nonprofits.” *Nonprofit Management and Leadership* 11 (3). Wiley Online
Library: 321–37.

McCambridge, Ruth. 2016. “Why Local Alzheimer’s Association Chapters Are
Breaking with National.” *Nonprofit Quarterly* [link](https://nonprofitquarterly.org/2016/01/25/why-local-alzheimers-association-chapters-are-breaking-with-national/).

Mollenhauer, L. 2009. “A Framework for Success for Nonprofit
Federations, Revised.”
[link](http://www.mollenhauer.ca/pdfs/Federations%20Framework%20for%20Success%20for%20Nonprofit%20Federations%20November%202009.pdf).

———. 2012. “Transformation in Structure and Governance: National Health
Charities Respond to New Challenges and Opportunities.”
[link](http://www.mollenhauer.ca/pdfs/HCCC%20Transformations%20.pdf).

Strategic Leverage Partners. 2009. “Local Business Structures
Within a Federated Model.”
[link](http://www.strategicleveragepartners.com/Perspectives_on_Federations.pdf).

Wei-Skillern, Jane, and Kerry Herman. 2008. “World Wildlife Fund U.S.”
Harvard Business Review Case Study.
[link](https://hbr.org/product/world-wildlife-fund-us/308035-PDF-ENG).

Widmer, C.H., and S Houchin. 1999. *Governance of National Federated
Organizations*. Research in Action. National Center for Nonprofit
Boards. [link](https://books.google.ca/books?id=DrwnAAAACAAJ).
