---
layout: default
title: From Principles to Operations
permalink: discussion-paper/06_principles_to_operations.html
bibliography: 'refs.bib'
---

Turning Principles into Operations 
==================================

Implementing governance best practices in our federation can greatly
improve how our federation functions, but we must make sure that the
federation operates in a way that lives up to the principles we choose
for our organization. The community as a whole must have input into
re-designing operations to meet the principles and updated governance of
the federation; here we offer a few high-level proposals that follow
directly from our discussion above.

Services 
--------

In the document we argue the best model for our federated organization
is services based. All partners in the federation provide services to
each other to build the national platform, and collectively to the
researchers. The Central Office is accountable to the researchers
(through the Members) and so the Central Office is responsible for
ensuring the Regions are accountable for meeting their agreed upon
services.

We propose that the priorities for the national platform will be set
through collaboration with the regions and the central office. These
priorities will be defined by a service or more appropriately a set of
services with the associated Service Level Agreements (SLAs) and
interfaces. The SLAs must have clearly defined metrics for evaluating
the effectiveness of the services provided.

**Proposal: Services provided should come with agreed-upon SLAs ensuring
quality and interoperability.**

A federation colleague (*e.g.*: a region or the central office) will
propose taking on the responsibility for providing some or all of the
necessary service or services, allowing regions to build on existing
strengths or meet regional priorities. These services should be assigned
to the federation colleague who has the skills and the mandate to
provide them. Ideally these assignments will be based on consensus, but
for big ticket items where this is unlikely to be possible by some
pre-agreed upon process led by the central office.

Once the agreement is made, the provider is free to implement the
service in any way they see fit, but are held accountable for meeting
the agreed-upon standards and metrics.

**Proposal: Services should be piloted, with definitions of success
decided upon before the pilot.**

Most services should normally go through a pilot phase before being
provided more widely. Deciding what success means for a pilot will
necessarily differ from service to service, and consensus should be
reached before the launching of a pilot what would merit a more
permanent, larger-scale roll-out.

It’s worth noting that it may be perfectly reasonable for some regions
or institutions to provide services locally that are not part of the
national platform; there are some services which are not possible to
provide nationally, or there might not be sufficient demand for outside
of a given region, but one jurisdiction may be willing to fund
nonetheless. Not every type of research support necessarily has to be
shoehorned into a national platform framework.

Relationship between Federation Partners 
----------------------------------------

While federations of equal partners must have a basis in consensus, each
partner has specific roles to play.

**Proposal: The central office should be responsible for nation-wide
needs assessments and researcher satisfaction.**

The central office must be responsible for the “birds-eye view” of the
Canadian research community, working closely with federal funding
agencies, national scholarly communities, and other research service
providers who can identify gaps in the research ecosystem, or
underserved communities. In that role, the central office should be
responsible for performing nation-wide needs assessments, measuring
researcher satisfaction, and ensuring the input of national researcher
communities into the federation’s discussions.

**Proposal: The agenda should be managed by the central office, and
consensus should be found or built around priorities.**

As a convener and facilitator, it will be the Central Office that drives
the push for evidence-based consensus around national priorities,
planning next steps, and where necessarily, building partnerships
outside of the federation to accomplish the federation’s agreed-upon
goals.

**Proposal: The central office should be responsible for the monitoring
and enforcing interoperability and other SLAs on the platform.**

Coherence of the national platform, and adherence to interoperability
and other agreed-upon standards, will necessarily be the responsibility
of the central office. It is this body that will perform monitoring of
these service levels, and testing interoperability. It is also the
central office’s responsibility to ensure that there are accountability
measures in place for service providers that are not meeting their SLAs.
However, since failure to provide interoperability or service levels is
a failure felt by the entire platform, not just the central office,
other federation partners must also play a role in enforcing these
standards.

The needs assessment and SLA or interoperability monitoring roles are
vital, and generally will be the primary technical roles of the central
office, as researcher-facing technical services and operations will
generally be best managed by the regional organizations and sites.

**Proposal: Responsibility for implementation and operations of
researcher-facing services should generally belong to the regional
organizations or an external partner.**

Being nimble, and being able to quickly tell if a researcher-facing
service is successful or if it should be changed, will normally require
researcher-facing services to be provided organizationally close to the
researchers. This will generally mean that such services will be housed
in one or more regional organization.

On the other hand, internal services necessary for the administration
and operation of the federation itself — CRMs, email, dashboards and
monitoring, finance services — might reasonably be housed in any of a
number of places.

Relationship with Other Partners 
--------------------------------

As the uses of computation and data broaden, and become more integrated
into all areas of scholarship, investigators will increasingly need
services that require coordination of remote and institutional
computation and storage, networking, data management, and other research
services. It won’t — and shouldn’t — matter to those researchers how
this coordination happens; either across multiple organizational
boundaries or within a single organization so long as the access to
resources is seamless.

**Proposal: The federation must work closely with other digital
infrastructure providers and research services organizations in service
design, service delivery, and future planning.**

Several models for how this close collaboration could work have been
proposed, and should be discussed by the community at large. As
suggested above, however, structures matter less in and of themselves
than they do for their effect on processes; and it is the process that
is crucial here. Just as it is unacceptable for researchers to have to
routinely cobble together resources to support their project within a
researcher-centred organization, it is unacceptable for researchers to
have to manage for themselves the even more complex task of coordinating
resources across research support organizations.

In research, collaboration means much more than participants announcing
to each other what they have done or what they intend to do; just so
with research service organizations. A meaningful collaboration, one
that can make the best use of each other’s strengths and resources,
means frequent discussions through planning, implementation, and
execution phases of a project.

**Proposal: Each federation colleague must advocate on behalf of the
federation as a whole and the federation’s researcher users to their
funding partners and other external partners.**

Unlike other large science infrastructure items like accelerators or
telescopes, the importance of readily and widely available fundamental
digital infrastructure like computation, data, network, and services
atop those resources requires constant advocacy and education. Each
federation colleague has a unique relationship with their funding
partners and other organizations. Collaboration and a commitment “whole
is greater than the sum of the parts” means that these opportunities
should be met with a sustained, coherent, and collaborative advocacy and
education effort, on behalf of the federation as a whole and all of the
federation’s research users and not just the individual colleagues.

Relationship with The Community 
-------------------------------

**Proposal: A renewed federation should renew its relationship with the
researcher community, emphasizing transparency, engagement, and
accountability.**

Good governance requires that the Board of Directors of the central
office be engaged and transparent with its Members, the institutions;
but those institutions are themselves representatives of the primary
constituents of our federation, the researchers and scholars. An updated
federation as a whole, including the central office, should re-engage
with that community in a collaborative and researcher-centred way,
emphasizing two-way communication, adaptation, and transparency.
