---
title: Background
permalink: discussion-paper/background.html
layout: default
---
Background {#background .unnumbered}
==========

Compute Canada has failed. We need the next one to succeed.

Compute Canada — the national project — was assembled to drastically
improve the capabilities of Canadian research. Investigators were too
often limited in the scholarship they could perform because of lack of
local research computing expertise, or availability of storage or
computational resources. The solution to this problem was clear then,
and is still clear now. The most scarce and valuable of our resources,
the expertise of research computing staff, actually grows, rather than
is diminished, by applying it to many diverse problems; and economies of
scale apply to computational and storage resources, which can be
efficiently shared. Thus, the best way to support Canadian research is
to pool resources nationally, rather than building many small silos. The
federal government agreed, providing a steady stream of federal
operating funding well above what similar organizations have available
elsewhere, freeing us from relying solely on institutions or even
provinces.

But at this point it is clear that Compute Canada — the actual existing
organization — has failed. Rather than building on the strengths of the
regional organizations and the national perspective of a central group,
the existing structure has radically worsened the natural tensions and
distrust between them, escalating into a spiralling cycle of control and
dismissive centralization on one side, and increasing disengagement and
resistance on the other.

We thus find ourselves in a situation where Compute Canada has a central
office costing millions of dollars a year — the equivalent of
approximately 40 average-sized NSERC Discovery grants at a time when
funding council budgets are frozen — with little direct benefit to
researchers. The central office drives all technical decision making
with a one-size-fits-all approach, such as the sorry and continuing saga
of the multi-year “emergency” procurement of storage. But even with this
level of centralization, there still is very little meaningful
cooperation or knowledge-sharing between institutions; and Ph.D.-level
computational scientists, rather than being active research partners in
projects suited to their expertise regardless of their location across
the country, largely spend their time answering help-desk-level
questions about compiler errors and file system issues from users who
happen to use the same computer that they sit beside. Lacking both the
efficiency that comes from centralization and the flexibility that comes
from decentralization, the community currently has the worst of both
extremes.

A better future is possible, but the necessary changes will not just
happen on their own. It is not in CFI’s power or ability to step in and
impose a new vision of what a Canadian computational research support
enterprise will be. Nor will the ministry insert itself into the
operations of a scientific support organization; if it did, dozens of
similar organizations across the country would rightly be up in arms.

So if the situation is to be fixed, it is up to us — the members, the
regions, and the researchers — to do so. The members and regions
together do have the power, and the duty to researchers, to reorganize
Compute Canada and rebuild a more responsive national platform for
computational research support.

But we can’t begin to fix our shared national computational research
support enterprise without first choosing what “fixed” looks like. An
inwards-focused Operational Plan exercise was promised after the
externally-focused strategic planning process in 2014; this never
happened. As a result, difficult but critically important internal
questions were not debated and never received consensus answers — What
services do researchers need? How do we best provide them? What is the
role of a central organization? What is the role of the regions? How do
decisions get made?

This document is one proposed set of answers to these questions; a
sketch of one possible alternate future for providing computational
research support in Canada. Its intention is to spur debate and inspire
other different sets of answers, starting a discussion that should have
happened three years ago. When a consensus emerges within our community,
we will have both the knowledge of where we want to go, and the power to
get there. Canadian research needs computing and data, and Canadian
research deserves better than the current situation for providing them.

