---
title: Principles
permalink: discussion-paper/principles.html
layout: default
---
Principles 
==========

Any structure for a Compute Canada, present or future, must be judged
against a set of principles we have for the running of such a research
support organization.

We propose six such principles, listed below. In this section we
describe them at length, and their current status.

Researcher-Centred 
-----------------

In any long-running organization, there is a tendency to lose the
perspective of the clients and instead to make decisions based on what
is easiest or best internally. Groups that solve problems using
technology are doubly prone to this, as the technology begins to seem
important for its own sake, rather than simply being a way to achieve
success for a client.

Modern agile software development addresses this problem by having
desired "User stories" &mdash; a new task a user would want to perform &mdash; drive
software development, with a product owner in charge of prioritizing the
user stories so that they genuinely reflect the needs of the clients.
While this is more meaningful for software development than service
delivery, the basic method shows what one approach to keeping the
clients needs firmly centred in decision making looks like, and how
seriously many large companies take it.

In earlier incarnations of Compute Canada, a goal of maintaining a
system in the top twenty of the Top 500 list of large systems was
occasionally suggested. This correctly was never made into a formal
priority, because it is simply not a legitimate goal of a research
support organization. Specific technical benchmarks are end goals of
technical organizations, not research support organizations. The end
goals of the latter can only be to effectively support particular
projects and programmes of research. Some of those efforts may indeed
end up requiring such a system, or access to such a system, but that
would simply be a means to achieving a true goal of the organization.

The difference between an organization that is focussed on its clients
and one whose focus is internal is reflected quite starkly their
behaviours, in particular where time and money is spent. A
researcher-focussed technical organization casts decision making in
terms of researcher needs and successes rather than technical
implementation details, deferring such details until the last possible
minute, and pushing such decisions as close to the researchers as
possible. A researcher-centered technical organization would never, as
an example, begin the process of issuing RFPs for compute systems by
drawing up prescriptive, detailed discussions of interconnects,
processors, and core counts, but instead the metrics would be described
in terms of use cases, job mixes, waiting times, and other
researcher-facing metrics.

Similarly, a researcher-centred technical organization does not take
urgent researcher needs such as storage, and pre-impose specific
technical architectures upon the storage types before issuing RFPs to
vendors; researcher-facing metrics are used, and any feasible solution
with sufficiently good metrics and costs are quickly and efficiently
procured.

A researcher-centred organization doesn’t shift internal bookkeeping
burdens onto the researchers, such as having multi-page sign-up forms
requiring third-party authorization and several day waiting periods
before access (compare for instance XSEDE or Amazon).

A researcher-centred organization allocates funding based on clear and
concrete current or near-term researcher needs, and avoids spending
large amounts of money on nebulous goals with no immediate driving need,
such as untested “Research Data Management” solutions.

In a researcher-centred organization, significant decisions can always
be justified in terms of making it easier for specific researchers to
tackle concrete current or proposed projects of theirs, and the amount
of resources allocated to that decision are proportional to those goals.

Service Oriented
----------------

Keeping the researcher central to decision-making will not automatically
ensure that one is offering the most valuable services possible;
researchers will not necessarily know to ask for services that have not
been routinely provided in the past. To ensure one is offering a full
range of valuable research-enabling services, one must constantly try
new offerings, but in a disciplined and researcher-centred way.

New services can be routinely and inexpensively trialled with pilot
projects, whether they centre on providing expertise, hardware, or a
combination. This approach can only work, however, when it is paired
with a commitment to ruthlessly prune services that provide little value
before incurring too much cost. An area where this approach is taken
successfully is training and education efforts, led by the regions and
with little central involvement, where enrollment provides immediate
feedback as to interest.

In a technology-focussed research computing organization, the main
research computing service offered tends to be helpdesk-style questions
about logging in, compiler errors, or queuing jobs — literally the
lowest-level, least-value-added services that could be meaningfully
offered beyond having the systems running. Compute Canada currently has
approximately 60 Ph.D.-level staff who spend much of their work time
performing this level of support.

Other organizations elsewhere offer a much richer set of services. Both
XSEDE with their extended collaborative support services[^1] and the
growing Research Software Engineering[^2] role in the UK embed staff
inside research groups for extended periods of time to provide a variety
of expertise, which can be particularly valuable for groups new to
computational research or trying new-to-them approaches. Such staff
participate deeply in the research, often to the level of authorship,
and manifestly enable research that would have happened more slowly or
not at all otherwise. In the 2013 staff survey, this level of
participation was mentioned often as a stated wish of the regions’
trained and ambitious technical staff.

SHARCNET has long offered dedicated programmer time, one type of such
services, and it has been quite successful and indeed very popular with
both researchers and staff. Such efforts have not yet been trialled
nationally.

While Compute Canada is hiring programmer staff currently, such staff
are, significantly, being hired centrally, report solely to senior
executives, and skill sets have been selected and staff hired without
any discussion with the researchers that they are proposed to enable.
The intention appears to be for middleware development, so that such
staff have little research computing background to speak of, but it is
only now after most of the hiring has been done that assessment of what
middleware is needed by the RPP and Cyberinfrastructure projects they
aim to support is being done.

A service-oriented research support organization ensures that services
are offered to enable research at all stages of a project and at all
levels of involvement, taking full advantage of expertise and resources
available to the organization. New services are rigorously trialled with
pilots before rolling out nationally, and service offerings are pruned
if unnecessary.

Modern 
------

A research service organization which uses technology to address
researcher needs must stay on top of new tools so that they can meet
those needs as effectively as possible. Researcher needs must always be
the driver, but solutions change quickly.

Those tools can certainly be new hardware — NVMe, FPGAs, and
server-class ARM CPUs are all technologies which could have significant
impact on research computing in the quite-near future — but they can
also be new technologies for robustly and efficiently providing
technical services.

As more and more companies rely on computer infrastructure, the past
decade and a half have led to improved approaches to ensuring the
services they provide are reliable and effective. For instance, servers
and network connections fail; rather than being blindsided by the
predictable, Netflix took the approach of routinely and automatically
testing of failure to ensure that individual failures did not adversely
effect users. Similarly, Google pioneered a now widely-adopted Systems
Reliability Engineer (SRE) approach[^3] which emphasizes extensive
automation, minimizing human intervention on routine operations (even
failures), allowing staff to focus on providing better kinds of
services.

An organization which adopts modern tools ensures there is paid staff
time and training for learning about new hardware and new approaches to
deploying them. It continually provides small experimental systems to
the staff (and interested researchers) to explore the suitability of new
hardware and new provision techniques for suitability of research
systems. It tests, modifies, and deploys new approaches to systems
management. It also takes seriously the possibility of using commercial
cloud providers as service provision options for some use cases.

An research support organization which adopts modern tools also takes
advantage of tools used elsewhere to provide better services, such as
following researcher interactions and project progress using tools like
Customer Relationship Management (CRM) packages, so that staff anywhere
in Canada who might be able to bring their expertise to bear to assist
the researcher can quickly be brought up to speed.

National 
--------

Any conversation about Compute Canada has to have as a starting point
that the reason for the effort is that pooling resources nationally is
the best way to support Canadian researchers, and that their location in
the country cannot matter for the type and level of services receive.

Truly national provision of resources to researchers, particularly
resources as diverse and important as expertise, is something which
takes active effort on the part of the research support organization; it
can’t be neglected as something which is allowed in principle but left
to the researcher to pursue on their own. Presenting researchers with a
list of national staff and bullets list of their expertise, and leaving
the researcher to try contacting staff members in turn to recruit them
to collaborate in their project, is a woefully inadequate approach to
enabling computational research projects.

A truly national organization must make sure that Canadian researchers
in all fields and institution types are adequately supported.
Researchers in biological and life sciences (particularly human health),
social sciences, and scholars in the digital humanities remain poorly
served by Compute Canada; applied research work in colleges and
polytechnics (over \$200M/yr of external funding, approximately 40% of
which comes from the private sector) is essentially completely ignored.

A truly national research support organization can’t revert to using
funding formulas that divvy funding up by the number of users in
geographical catchment areas, but must fund services and providers to
support researchers nationally.

Interoperable, not Identical 
----------------------------

The internet is arguably the most important computational tool for
enabling faster and better research made in modern times, and yet the
central internet body, the IETF, does not specify brands of computer and
browser, nor enforce a list of services that every website must provide
each user. Instead, strict interoperability requirements, coupled with
the freedom to innovate within those standards, have combined to make
the internet such a powerful research tool.

Similarly, the Global Alliance for Genomics and Health (GA4GH[^4]) is an
international effort to build computational research tools to make full
use of the increasing volume of genomics data to improve human health. A
recurring mantra of the effort is to “Co-operate on interfaces, compete
on implementations”. By building interoperability standards, allowing
specialization for implementations, and working iteratively, the project
is enabling new efforts like the Beacon Network[^5] for data discovery
and the Matchmaker Exchange[^6] for better understanding rare diseases.

The Canadian research environment can be strengthened by ensuring that
each project has the potential to access the complete national portfolio
of computational science resources. But to specify a list of acceptable
model numbers of hard drives to use nationally, or that each region
provide copies of the same services to the national research community,
is to profoundly misunderstand the point of working together and pooling
resources.

Focusing on specifying interoperability rather than implementations
immediately provides several advantages. It allows specialization, with
different providers providing solutions that are better for different
use-cases; it allows experimentation, testing out new implementations at
one site without disrupting the platform as a whole; it allows rapid
prototyping and piloting of new approaches without having to roll out
homogeneous changes to the entire country and hoping for the best.

Well-defined interoperability requirements also makes fully bringing new
participants into the platform much easier. Rather than requiring a new
site already providing services to either completely change how they
operate or participate only fitfully in the national platform, clear
expectations and interoperability requirements allow the site to
participate fully by exposing their services and infrastructure through
clear interfaces and requirements.

Equal Federal Partners 
----------------------

Canada has one of the most fiscally decentralized governments in in the
G20, particularly when it comes to funding of research. This flexibility
has real benefits, but it introduces complexities that are just as real.
This is why we can not just copy successful organizational models from
the UK, or from XSEDE (from the US, where states generally play very
little role in funding research). Even the EU is of little help to us
here; their pan-Europe effort, PRACE, focuses exclusively on one type
(“Tier 0”) of research computing, with all other aspects of research
computing support expected to be supplied to researchers by their member
states or institutions.

Compute Canada funding is, directly or indirectly, split by the national
and provincial governments 50:50[^7]. While we’re all supporting the
same researchers, the provinces will reasonably have different
priorities than the national government, and their priorities and
existing capabilities will differ amongst themselves. Any organizational
structure or process that doesn’t acknowledge and accommodate those
perfectly valid and healthy tensions between equal funding partners will
be too brittle to last.

As Canadians have known for roughly 150 years, decision-making by
consensus between national and provincial bodies can be a slow and
occasionally frustrating process; but the results are robust and
durable, and are better decisions for having had the multiple inputs. A
platform that values the federal nature of our partnership, and
interoperability rather than uniformity, can build on the strengths and
priorities of its participants rather than trying to paper them over.
